# The Cunning Linguist: Your Go-To Translation Resource

## Introduction
* This section should provide a brief overview of the purpose and functionality of the program. It should also include any relevant background information or context.

Welcome to the documentation for "The Cunning Linguist: A Basic Universal Translator" (BUT), a language translation tool that utilizes the OpenAI API and GPT-3 model. With BUT, you can translate text from one language to another in real-time through a convenient graphical user interface (GUI). Simply input the source and target languages, as well as the text to be translated, and BUT will provide the translation in no time. You can also copy the translation to the clipboard or reset the input fields through the GUI. BUT is written in Python and makes use of the tkinter library for the GUI and the configparser library to read in the API key from a configuration file. With BUT, you'll have everything you need to become a master linguist.

## Installation Instructions
* This section should provide step-by-step instructions on how to install and set up the program, including any required dependencies or libraries.

To install and set up B.U.T., follow these steps:

1. Make sure you have Python 3 and the tkinter and configparser libraries installed on your system. If you do not have these already, you can install them using the following command:

```pip install python tkinter configparser```

2. Download the "BUT - The Cunning Linguist" source code from the GitHub repository.

3. Extract the downloaded file to your desired location.

4. Navigate to the extracted directory using a terminal or command prompt.

5. Obtain an API key for the OpenAI API. You can sign up for a free API key at https://beta.openai.com/signup/.

6. Create a plain text file named "api_key.txt" in the root directory of the B.U.T. source code, and paste your API key into the file. Make sure the file contains only the API key and nothing else.

7. Run the program using the following command:

```python main.py```

"BUT - The Cunning Linguist" should now be installed and ready to use.

## Usage
* This section should describe how to use the program, including any input and output parameters, as well as any options or features available to the user.

To use "BUT - The Cunning Linguist", follow these steps:

1. Open the program by running the command python main.py in the root directory of the BUT. source code.

2. In the "Source Language" field, enter the language code for the language you want to translate from. You can find a list of supported language codes here.

3. In the "Target Language" field, enter the language code for the language you want to translate to.

4. In the "Text" field, enter the text you want to translate.

5. Click the "Translate" button to translate the text. The translated text will be displayed in the "Translation" field.

6. To copy the translation to the clipboard, click the "Copy to Clipboard" button. A notification will be displayed to confirm that the text has been copied.

7. To reset the input fields, click the "Reset" button. This will clear the language and text entries, as well as the translation and notification.

That's it! You can now easily translate text from one language to another using your BUT.


## Configuration
* This section should explain any configuration options available to the user, including any relevant files or settings.

Temperature: The temperature parameter determines the randomness of the translations generated by the model. A higher temperature will result in more random translations, while a lower temperature will result in more deterministic translations. By default, BUT uses a temperature of 0.5. You can change the temperature by modifying the TEMPERATURE constant in the source code. It is recommended to keep the temperature within the range of 0.0 to 1.0.

Configuration file: BUT uses a configuration file named "config.ini" to store the path to the API key file. By default, this file is located in the root directory of the B.U.T. source code. If you want to change the location of the API key file, you can modify the "api_key_file" setting in the "config.ini" file.
That's it for the configuration options for BUT You should now have everything you need to customize the behavior of the program to your liking.

## Examples
* This section should provide examples of how to use the program, including sample input and output.

To give you an idea of how your BUT works, here are some examples of translations you can try:

Translate from **English** to **Spanish**: To translate the text "Hello, world!" from English to Spanish, set the "Source Language" field to "en" and the "Target Language" field to "es". Then, enter "Hello, world!" in the "Text" field and click the "Translate" button. The translation "Hola, mundo!" will be displayed in the "Translation" field.

Translate from **French** to **German**: To translate the text "Bonjour, tout le monde!" from French to German, set the "Source Language" field to "fr" and the "Target Language" field to "de". Then, enter "Bonjour, tout le monde!" in the "Text" field and click the "Translate" button. The translation "Hallo, alle zusammen!" will be displayed in the "Translation" field.

Translate from **Italian** to **Japanese**: To translate the text "Ciao, mondo!" from Italian to Japanese, set the "Source Language" field to "it" and the "Target Language" field to "ja". Then, enter "Ciao, mondo!" in the "Text" field and click the "Translate" button. The translation "こんにちは、世界！" will be displayed in the "Translation" field.

With your BUT, you can easily translate text from one language to another, no matter what languages you choose. Give it a try and see what kind of translations you can come up with!

## Troubleshooting
* This section should provide guidance on how to troubleshoot any problems that may arise while using the program.
If you encounter any issues while using your BUT, try the following solutions:

- "API key not found" error: This error occurs when the API key file is not found or the API key is invalid. To fix this issue, make sure you have obtained a valid API key and created a plain text file named "api_key.txt" in the root directory of the BUT source code, containing only your API key. Also, make sure the path to the API key file is correct in the "config.ini" file.

- "Model not found" error: This error occurs when the specified model engine is not found or is not supported by the OpenAI API. To fix this issue, make sure you have specified a valid model engine in the MODEL_ENGINE constant in the source code. You can find a list of supported model engines here.

- Translation is not accurate or does not make sense: This can be caused by a variety of factors, such as incorrect language codes, typos in the text, or an inappropriate temperature setting. Make sure you have specified the correct language codes and double-check the text for any errors. You can also try adjusting the temperature setting to see if it affects the translation quality.

If you continue to experience issues after trying these solutions, please contact the developer or submit an issue on the [GitHub repository](https://github.com).

## License information
* This section should include any applicable license information, including any restrictions on use or distribution.

The Basic Universal Translator - The Cunning Linguist is privately licensed by Franklin Media Australia Pty Ltd for non-commercial use only. This means that you may use the software for personal or internal business purposes, but you may not distribute, sell, or use it for any commercial purpose without the express written permission of Franklin Media Australia Pty Ltd.

By using The Basic Universal Translator - The Cunning Linguist, you agree to be bound by the terms of the Franklin Media Australia Pty Ltd - Private Use Copyright License. The full text of this license can be found [here](https://www.franklinmedia.com.au/impressum-credits/private-use-copyright-license/).

Please note that this software is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind, express or implied. Franklin Media Australia Pty Ltd shall not be liable for any damages arising from the use of this software.

If you have any questions or concerns about the license for The Basic Universal Translator - The Cunning Linguist, please contact Franklin Media Australia Pty Ltd at admin@franklinmedia.com.au.

## Credits and acknowledgments
* This section should list any individuals or organizations that contributed to the development of the program.

We would like to express our gratitude to the following individuals and organizations for their contributions to this app:

- The app is owned and was commissioned by Franklin Media Australia Pty Ltd.
- The app was developed by S.R. Smedley, also known by their online handle Z3r0-K3lv1n.
- We would like to thank OpenAI and their ChatGPT model for their assistance in the development of this app.
Thank you to all those who have contributed to the creation of this app. We couldn't have done it without you.

## Version history
* This section should document any updates or changes made to the program over time.
- 1.1
  - Initial release 

* 1.2
  - Added temperature parameter to the OpenAI API call
  - Added configuration file to store API key
  - Added timer to clear notification after a certain amount of time
  - Fixed bug where translated text was not saved to a global variable


* 1.3.5
  - Added support for translation from any language to any language
  - Changed name of language entry to source language entry
  - Added new entry for target language
  - Updated prompt for OpenAI API call to include source language
  - Fixed bug where target language was not being passed to the OpenAI API call
  - Updated layout of GUI

## Contact information
* This section should provide contact information for the developer or maintainer of the program.

If you have any questions or concerns about the Basic Universal Translator - The Cunning Linguist app, please contact the copyright holder, Franklin Media Australia Pty Ltd, at the following email address: [admin@franklinmedia.com.au](admin@franklinmedia.com.au)

